hey what's up I got a question from a
guy named Robert in Germany and Robert
is asking me about methods of effective
activism this is not the first time I've
talked about this topic if you're vegan
if you're arrested in political action
of any kind in the 21st century this is
the video for you hope you stick with me
I also hope you click on the video I
uploaded just two days ago that has
Gandhi in the title it's called vegan
activism Gandhi and direct action
everywhere I think that's the video that
Robert is responding to yesterday I
uploaded a much more popular video
that's talking about diet and exercise
but really that video talking about
Mohandas Gandhi the politics of the
liberation struggle in India concepts of
non-violence and protest that is really
a more important and more meaningful
video for you to see I can say that
without knowing who you are in terms of
talking about the issues that bring
people this channel I don't think anyone
comes to this channel because they think
I'm good looking or for diet advice I
mean no one's tuning in to watch me do
yoga in revealing clothes I not a lot of
special effects not a light Ament value
but we are talking about some of the
issues that I know are haunting for a
large number of vegans and just
politically sensitive engaged people on
a daily basis whether you connect to
animal rights ecology or maybe you're
advocating for another foreign political
change okay so Robert wrote to me from
Germany and the first and most
fundamental thing that he communicates
to me in this message although I'm not
quoting it directly is that during the
last year he's been participating in a
number of protests some of them resemble
the methods used by direct action
everywhere and now that group direct
action everywhere are actually setting
up an organization in his town and he
has the feeling that these protests are
not effective
and are a waste of his time and he's
been listening to discussions such as my
own and a few other YouTube channels
questioning what is effective activism
anyway what are the ways we should
engage with these issues and promote
them and so on
I never be honest with you my channel is
almost unique and talked about this
stuff which is sad I'm not saying that
to insult anyone else but what you get
is a lot of cheerleading and you don't
get a lot of practical discussion of the
questions of how do we actually bring
about these changes in the world I made
a video quite a few months ago I made
some videos talking about what Western
vegans have been doing in Thailand
lately in Chiang Mai Thailand and then
in response to questions I got from
viewers I started talking in more detail
in an applied way about what difference
can you make what difference could these
people make the people who already were
living and working in Thailand who were
already part of this this movement this
social phenomenon of having the Thai
fruit festival over here and so on and I
made that video it's not just because I
got the emails because I knew even
though the number of people who watched
my comments it wasn't a huge number of
people but I know that it reached
exactly the right people I knew that my
commentary had actually hit the target
market of the people who were in Chiang
Mai who were organizing these festivals
and who had the capacity to make a
positive difference and since then that
discussion of method even though in some
ways it may be boring because it's
getting into precise questions of what
difference can we make and how can we
make it I've heard back from people many
months later who said you know what that
stuff you said I still think about it it
still stays with me I'm still thinking
about how I can make a difference and
whether I should be doing some of the
things you said in that video instead of
doing what I'm doing now on a really
basic level Robert to address the guy
who sent me this message on a basic
level what I would advise you to do is
to never disregard that feeling the
feeling that your time is being waste
the feeling that this is kind of weird
the feeling that what you're doing with
this group doesn't really make sense it
may not be an entirely rational feeling
it may just be a matter of an emotional
response to what's going on around you
but that is normally the beginning of a
rational process that challenges the
power that a group has over you I'm not
saying this because I think that being
an isolated individual is the best way
to bring about political change it's not
you want to get into organizations you
want to move in a group you want to be
able to organize and motivate more
people and you yourself may want to
receive organization and motivation by
the people it's a wonderful thing but
yeah that feeling you get that maybe
standing in front of the airport and
shouting at strangers fur is murder
hands off animals 100 million cows die
every year these are examples he gives
in his message maybe this is not
effective maybe this is kind of weird or
kind of counterproductive even if it's
just a feeling yeah hold on to that
don't suffocate it don't silence it and
then follow up the way that he's
evidently doing by trying to engage in
some kind of productive questioning and
critique and coming to new solutions but
before you come to new solutions you're
going to come to new understandings of
the nature of the problem what is
effective activism to digress only
slightly one of the reasons why I have
so much contempt for the people who
resort to violence and the people who
glamorize violence such as terrorism
such as I know trying to burn down and
slaughterhouses trying to blow things up
one of the reasons why I have so much
contempt for that is precisely that
approach fails to go through a process a
dialectical process in the old-fashioned
sense of really trying to understand
what the situation is that
I can give big examples of this and I
can give small I remember being at an
ecological product protest in Toronto
where the protest was illegal because of
where it was located by a number of
meters and when I said to the organizers
basically the loudest and most obnoxious
people there who considered themselves
the leaders although nobody there right
now their leadership I said to them look
you know where you're protesting it
blocks traffic and at least
hypothetically it actually blocks an
ambulance lane it's not worth describing
but in that part of Toronto there are
several hospitals clustered together and
there's more than one way for the
ambulances to get in behind the
hospitals and so when one way already
has an ambulance in it they come in
another way so it's not it's not every
five minutes the nebulas past there but
it was if you just looked at the signs
and looked at where thought that was
obvious so you're having an illegal
protest that the police have to confront
you're forcing the police to kick you
out and if we had the porters just over
there was not even walking it a few
metres you know there's a big concrete
area over there where this protest would
be a hundred percent legal and where the
police would be on your side oh and the
response to that this is really Canadian
this is really downtown Toronto this is
what english-speaking white Anglo people
in Canada like the response to that was
for them to insult me yell at me and
tell me that I was a cop that I must be
an undercover cop to be saying this my
suggestions were hockey percent
practical this may seem like an absurd
question of efficacy in activism but in
some ways it's typical it's showing the
difference between people who just think
of activism as an emotional outpouring
who maybe have an image of street
protests from newsreel footage from the
1970s maybe it's from watching movies I
don't know that glamorizes the act of
standing and screaming on
street corner as if it were the apogee
of I don't as if it were the fulcrum on
which the world turned and as if this is
the way great changes in the world's
history are brought about and it almost
never is that kind of protest really
unless it's bringing together people of
other aspirations other ways to
cooperate other ways to achieve things
is almost a complete waste of your time
the main effect of street protest is
really just to reward the interest of
the people who are participating it
almost never reaches an audience outside
of itself outside of the participants so
in that sense we have a separate word
for that really what you're doing is
holding a rally and in a lot of ways
having a rally on a street corner is
less effective than having a conference
in a building where people can really
talk really start to set up other forms
of cooperation and so on if you really
want do something on the street I'm
gonna use an example from South Korea
but this is true of many many countries
in Europe too you know in South Korea
the government actually has designated
areas on the street where you can
reserve time once a month I think you
could do it once a week or something but
it's it's limited you're not supposed to
be there every day you can reserve time
once a month every month and then you're
allowed on that street corner to sell
things like you know someone might set
up a used book stand or a food stand
you're allowed to preach your religion
you're allowed to play musical
instruments you're allowed to play music
and try to raise money or promote your
band and part of the point is you know
the government doesn't want you to be a
constant nuisance but for a certain
number of hours of the day once a month
you can have that spot in Seoul Korea
and the government gives you the
permission to do that so in contrast to
screaming at people this is just one
example to get you to illustrate the the
types of strategic issues I'm talking
about imagine if you had just five
vegans to cooperate who set up a stand
selling pancakes I'm not even talking
about free pancakes and you know why I
say five people so there's one guy
is gonna be mixing the ingredients in a
bowl he's probably gonna have to come
back and forth to the site to bring
pancake batter there may be two people
working at a grill of actually making
the pancakes there's gonna be one person
handling the money and talking to people
you could make vegan pancakes and you
can include with it the information look
I know you think that pancakes have to
be made with eggs and milk but they
don't there's another way to live and we
can make fabulous pancakes Kevin with
you and they're vegan now what
information you include with that I mean
the ultimate way of imparting
information is a cereal box
you know boxed cereal when you were a
kid you would read everything on the
back of the cereal box and what did you
know that have cartoons or information
when I was growing up if there was
health information if there was
historical information in the back of a
cereal box I'd read it all
you know the packaging you use to give
people takeaway pancakes you could
probably provide a hell of a lot of
information about Venus in there but
apart from the guilt trip like apart
from showing people imagery or
communicating how terrible the egg
industry is apart from communicating a
terrible the dairy industry is that
stuff is important but what you really
need to communicate our aspirations what
you really need to communicate our
ambitions about what you're trying to
accomplish this is one of the greatest
failings of street protests because the
aspiration of a street protest is just
have a street protest the aspiration of
disruption and DX's method is disruption
look I am simplifying you can click on
my channel I've had a series of in-depth
videos talking about DXE gyration
everywhere their methodology history of
the musician so please do not say I'm
oversimplifying of more than half an
hour of video already really talking in
depth about that organization the theory
and method of what they're doing
ambition is the crucial difference
between a group of hippies just throwing
a party in Thailand and wasting their
time and the beginnings of meaningful
political or
if you were getting together with that
group of five people to make vegan
pancakes your ultimate ambition your
aspiration is not just to make pancakes
if you do that once a month just 12
times a year for one thing you're gonna
create tremendous coherence with a group
of five people who are actually making
the pancakes can be a really meaningful
thing it takes only a certain amount of
time out of their lives but you've got
to have some ambitions what might those
ambitions be it's gonna be different for
different types of people I don't know
what kind of person Robert is if he's
someone who's you know basically into
writing and publishing maybe you want to
produce an annual magazine right why
does the magazine exist not really for
outreach but at a minimum you publish
something once a year maybe when you're
older you get to look back on that and
say okay you know this magazine really
brought together the people who are
interested in I don't know veganism
animal rights ecology whatever the list
of issues are that that activate you
maybe it's something in that direction
if you were into the theater I mean
theatre can lead to activism a
difference you're into filmmaking can
lead to activism of different kinds if
you really have the level of education
and organization and just durable
engagement with the local scene there's
so much you can do legally through City
Hall politically this is also why again
I have so much contempt for the the
terrorist approach to animal rights
there are always these kind of weak
points in the legal system that allow
you to challenge profound issues through
trivial violations of the law so you
know the trucks that carry the cows to
the slaughter you can figure out that
those trucks are going over bridges and
the bridges are actually it's not legal
for that truck to go over that bridge
because the truck is too heavy or too
wide or something okay that may sound
trivial if you're in a country like
Germany that has a good quality of rule
of law good legal system so on that
gives you something you can challenge
you can bring to court and of course it
can have a devastating effect short term
on the local industry where you're
saying look
this industry is breaking the law and
it's not legal for them to be shipping
the animals and the way they're doing it
now you're not challenging that in court
or in Parliament or whatever your system
is you're not challenging that because
you want the industry to use smaller
trucks that's not the point at all of
course the point is ultimately veganism
animal rights ecology etc etc there are
all these other issues
I used this not because it's an
especially moving example it's an
especially meaningless example but those
really are the opportunities if you have
people you can work with who are lawyers
if you have people you work with who
really understand local political
processes you can take advantage of the
democratic aspects of local government
to challenge the norms of how the meat
industry operates and yes that'll be
covered in the newspapers and yes
that'll bring public attention to you
but moreover the public attention it
brings will be people who respect you
people say oh these are intelligent
organized people it won't be the kind of
attention you get by looking like a
maniac standing on the street corner
just screaming slogans alright I mean
not all attention is equal direct action
everywhere every plant are very proud of
themselves every time they get into the
newspapers look at what the newspapers
say the newspapers say these people are
a bunch of idiots well you got attention
you can feel proud of that but that's
not the same attention you gave say oh
you know this group of organized people
they're bringing a legal challenge on
these grounds etc I remember there were
some legal cases like that in Ireland
pertaining to the bombing of Iraq where
they found you know technical things
that were illegal about Ireland's
participation in the war basically
because Ireland had not gone through the
democratic process of actually declaring
war like their government the
parliaments hadn't had a proper debate
and you know they hadn't democratically
declared war in Iraq and so it was
technical things like when a truck was
moving bombs between two different Air
Force bases within Ireland in order to
bomb Iraq it was like well this actually
violates Irish law and your opinion in
law because
you know you guys didn't really have a
democratic process it was something like
them so that's it that's a vague memory
but I got to tell you beginning middle
and end that sort of thing can really be
a very meaningful form of activism in
terms of how it motivates and organized
the people around you uh now all of
these examples actually are assuming a
pretty positive situation like even that
example I said work in Korea working
Europe having five people cooperating to
make pancakes but then you're making the
pancakes and you're communicating
aspiration and ambition not just
self-indulgence not just a vacation in
Thailand that you have other ambitions
in mind and you've got to decide as a
group what those are it cetera a lot of
us are not in a position where we even
have five people we can trust to
cooperate with right people who are
competent people who are containing five
people like that even for something like
a magazine so it's not that high
pressure it's hard I think if things are
hard all over um when I lived in
Saskatchewan I thought I did a lot of
research what kind of activism I could
do there what kind of political activity
I could be involved with at that time in
that place and my conclusion was that
the only form of activism really opened
to me was actually prison activism was
to get involved with education within
the jail system and I didn't know what
idiom to use you want to talk about that
as a weak link in the chain it was an
opportunity an opportunity to do
something positive and again what that
leads you into I met with and talked
with people who already were prison
activists there I was figuring out how
how the whole mechanism of government
worked what the opportunities were and
you know the last time I lived in
England that was relatively brief I was
living in Cambridge England likewise
there I met and talked with one guy he
was a prison activist slash prison
educator and I was looking at doing that
there but at that time so I now I have
no religion identify as an atheist as a
nihilistic atheist I openly describe
myself as an X bonus and a nihilist
um but back when I was living in England
I was looking at prison education partly
because I still identified as a Buddhist
back then and there was this opportunity
for talking about non-violence and
providing reading materials and getting
into the prison system through Buddhism
so again these are not best-case
scenarios life in Saskatchewan is really
difficult and depressing in many
different ways
but when I was looking at the range of
issues I cared about and how I could
make a difference
that was what I discovered at that time
that was what seemed viable to me and I
had to make that decision as someone
working alone because I realized there
was nobody there was not even one other
person I could cooperate with or rely on
I had to work totally alone in
Saskatchewan it was like well the prison
system is an opportunity for me as one
isolated intellectual to make a pause
the difference is still today here I'm
living in Victoria west coast of Canada
I'm still totally alone my options are
still very very limited but in some ways
situation here is less bleak than
Saskatchewan now again I'm veganism is
not the only issue I'm talking about
here when I was living in Saskatchewan I
cared a lot about First Nations First
Nations is our way of saying our
indigenous people in Canada and in the
United States they say American Indians
I was interested specifically in First
Nations languages so trying to prevent
the languages from going extinct
language education I was interested in
politics connected to those issues so
veganism is not the only thing that
motivates me in life whoever you are
watching this video you have to be aware
of what your issues and motivations are
what range of things would organize
people around you or that you would
engage with in organizing others so the
original question from Robert it kind of
wraps up by saying how do I find out
what the right activism is for me I've
just described in a whole bunch of
examples the type of complex research
and decision-making process that I think
we all have to engage in and you have to
engage in it again
again every time you move to a new city
it doesn't end there isn't one set of
answers even for you as an individual
that's gonna last for your whole life if
I just move within Canada to another
city the answers are difficult for me
and if you've watched this channel you
know in the past I lived in Hong Kong I
lived in Cambodia I lived in Laos the
type of political activism I could do in
each of those places was totally
different when I was in Laos I cared a
lot about ecology Laos is a communist
dictatorship there's no democratic
rights for anyone nobody has the right
to have a street protest in Laos and you
you really will be put in prison if you
have a street protest that was a
situation then but one type of activism
I could engage in was actually writing
articles one article I wrote was
translated into Thais as publishing
ability in English and it was
intentionally written in a way so that
it could reach the audience of communist
government officials of people in power
because those are the people I wanted to
influence you know other things I did in
Laos involved working for an NGO that
handed out sacks of rice to starving
people you can call that activism or not
it is what it is so I just say in the
old-fashioned sense this is dialectic
you could say peripatetic to use another
philosophy term these are questions
you're gonna ask again and again just
walking around talking to people and
collecting conflicting pieces of
information to put together a bigger
picture and understand the situation
you're in the ultimate constraints are
time and manpower I mentioned you know
getting together with friends and
cooking pancakes once a month do you
really have the time for that some
people do some people don't
what about manpower do you actually have
four or five friends who can collaborate
you that's such a simple project right
but now start thinking through in your
mind all the requirements there are
financial acquirements you probably need
one of those portable tent setups that
Street vendors have you're gonna
somebody's going to need to invest in
either renting or owning a grill is
whole checklist things probably if you
live in a western country you've got to
learn about the health and hygiene
standards
because you can't make and sell food
without complying with public safety
standards so the time and energy to get
set up is considerable right and now
right away through our relations of
hierarchy if it's one guy who invests
all the money in that and to invest the
time in learning the the procedures and
who maybe buys all the packaging and
prints up the leaflets or the text on
the packaging talking about veganism or
whatever issues they are so is that guy
now self-appointed dictator for the
project how the other people feel about
that and cut this is not I'm critical of
flaws mon coeur this is not a problem I
have I'm really aware of relationships
of authority even when they're informal
but we have vegan groups here in
Victoria and exactly the people in
charge are the people who are most
deceived who are most unaware who are
the most sleepwalking about the fact
they are running a little miniature
dictatorship and that like one guy and
his girlfriend make all the decisions
for what that vegan group is gonna do
and nobody else you know even when the
the questions are purely meant to be
helpful purely meant to be trying to
make an effective use of time where that
can't creep in so but you know in this
case in a sense it's justified if one
person has put all the money and so how
is that going to be organized how is
that going to work even though that's
such a simple example these are all the
complexities they'll into it and all the
questions that cannot have been again
there's a whole other category of
questions here that I have I have
addressed in relatively old videos and
videos from like more than a year ago do
you have it in your heart to really
cooperate with people who have deep
differences from you if you're left-wing
can you cooperate with someone who's
conservative they're conservative but
they agree with you about vivisection
veganism there are right-wing people who
care a lot about you know forest
preservation wood habitats if you're if
you're little movement is mostly about
preserving the forest you're gonna have
a mix of left-wing people and right-wing
people I'm an atheist can I cooperate
with Christians will Christians
cooperate with me
you know even at the level of organizing
just five people together all of these
things come to the floor and again this
is why I don't have sympathy for the
violent protesters because they are they
are basically avoiding all these
questions and I also really don't have
sympathy for just standing on the street
street and screaming at people this kind
of disruptive activism because really
you're creating the illusion of
solidarity you're creating the illusion
of a massive well-organized movement but
the reality is you have ten different
people who are all holding a sign and
and do you really have a sense do you
really appreciate how deeply divided
those people are ones left-wing ones
right-wing ones Hindu ones Christian
whatever you know the meaninglessness of
that formal protest the masks that
people wear sometimes a literal mask but
sometimes the figurative mask and making
herself into an anonymous automaton
standing and screaming at people in the
street I think that's really very
misleading and instead what I want is
both to meaningfully engage with the
other people who make up my movement
even if it's just five people making
pancakes five people making a magazine
but maybe it's five people organizing to
get a lawyer and bring a legal challenge
of some kind and I also want to engage
in a meaningful way with the general
public and if you're doing something
respectable whether it's the legal
challenge or the pancakes you'll find
that members of the public people who
are not vegan are people who don't care
about your issues or people who don't
think they care about issues they are
going to respect you and engage with you
in a much more meaningful way than if
you're just someone who's disrupting
traffic someone who's disrupting their
dinner someone who's just making their
life uncomfortable at the airport for 15
minutes for no good reason
so finally I've said this this type of
analysis of your situation ultimately
you're looking for opportunities that
will be unique I live on an island
it's called Vancouver Island but it's
not part of the City of Vancouver
Vancouver City and Vancouver Island are
two separate things on this island
there's an opportunity because this is
one of the last parts of Canada
where cows are still slaughtered using a
shotgun
we don't have slaughterhouses here and
for local economic reasons we can't well
we don't the meat industry does not ship
cows back and forth between the island
and the mainland on the mainland there
are big industrialized slaughterhouses
but here the slaughter of animals is not
industrialized so from my perspective
that's a huge opportunity for activism
you could do friendly activism you could
just get out and interview these guys
these guys who literally shoot animals
in the head with a shotgun you could
film the process but you know I mean
unlike an enclosed industrialized
slaughterhouse the fact that here it's
out in the middle of a field and it's
still kind of amateur and so on for a
filmmaker for an activist even if you're
not confrontational but at all to just
get out there and interview these guys
and say hey from your perspective what's
the meaning of life I think that's a
huge opportunity and wherever you're
living based on the legal circumstances
the geographical circumstance situation
the meat industry there are going to be
unique opportunities that you can take
advantage of - and if not you got to be
honest to yourself I've said in the past
and I still say now what I'm doing on
YouTube is not activism
at best you can call this digital
activism what I'm doing right now I
think of as the same as going to a
coffee shop and having a conversation
with a bunch of strangers I'm reaching
many more strangers this way than I
would at any local coffee shop but to me
this is not activism but right now in my
life
this is all that's possible for me I
have pressure on me to finish this
University diploma to start earning
money to start supporting my daughter I
have family pressure economic pressure
or educational pressure I have I have a
really limited scope of options but
still when I first moved here I really
did try to meet up with cooperate with
and collaborate with the local vegans
the local vegan organizations and so on
but the reality for me living in my
circumstances is that it's really a
complete waste of my time to take 3
hours and go to a picnic with the local
vegan folks here even though I've done
that I've wasted the 3 hours doing that
I'm not gonna do it again and this comes
back to the late motif of ambition I'm
not even going to tell you that the
local vegans here are bad people it's
not the point it's not my perspective
but whatever if they don't have the
ambition to make something happen then I
can't work with them even if they're the
greatest people in the world and I'm
really limited in the time money and
effort I can devote to it so right now
taking these circumstances all together
the human circumstances legal
circumstances the best I can do is sit
here on YouTube and talk to you but as I
say at every stage of my life wherever I
was living whatever my job was whatever
my situation was I was always trying to
analyze that situation to figure out
what is the answer for me now in terms
of how I can be effective in political
activism forget the word activism what's
the way I can be effective in terms of
political action